# Gear-shifting
## Gear shifting in hyperthermophylic Archaea. | Yanfei Zhang, Hans V.Westerhoff | 2022|

The well characterized thermoacidophilic Sulfolobus solfataricus (S. solfataricus) thrives in extreme environments at temperatures ranging from 60 to 90 °C and pH between 2 and 4. We here focus not so much on the challenge posed by each of these individual conditions, but on the challenge of the variation in those conditions. We examine whether a phenomenon we call ‘gear shifting’ could be at play. We do this in four different ways: (i) We examine whether thermodynamically such gear shifting is possible and could optimize the organism’s fitness. (ii) We submit the organism’s genome-wide metabolic map (Ulas et al., 2012) to Flux Balance Analysis to examine whether such gear shifting could correspond to changes in optimal flux pattern with respect  to altering the growth requirement of ATP (Gibbs energy) relative to pyruvate (Carbon).  (iii) We examine whether the enzyme kinetic properties of one of the organism’s metabolic networks would make it shift gears when subjected to varying ATP demands.  (iv) We examine whether the transcriptome changes observed when changing the growth temperature should be expected to cause gear shifting.  Performing the flux balance analysis on the genome-sequence based metabolic map, we find a diversity of possible flux patterns with 8 different ATP yields. Using the transcriptome as basis, we find that also the shifts between expressed pathways suggest the operation of various parallel metabolic routes operating at different ATP costs or yields. In the non-equilibrium thermodynamic analysis, we show how transitions between flux patterns could be beneficial for the flux of ATP synthesis. We identify a mode of continuous variation of the ATP/catabolism stoichiometry that should be optimal for the organism if it is differentially stressed energetically. The simulations with an in silico kinetic replica show that the ATP/ADP ratio should be a strong determinant of the relative fluxes through the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) plus phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK) pathway on the one hand and the non-phosphorylating glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPN) pathway. With an increase in the ATP/ADP ratio, the flux through GAPDH decreased, whilst the flux through GAPN increased monotonically. Flux balance analysis further shows that with this different pathway allocation the harvest of Gibbs energy or biomass changes. Likewise, according to FBA, at different oxygen concentrations different electron transfer pathways may be used to best achieve certain objectives. We identify these phenomena as ‘gear shifting’, which should enable organisms’ to enhance their fitness under conditions of time-variant challenges.  
